Proposed Project: Smoking Cessation Mobile Application (tentative name)

    Abstract
        Smoking is a dangerous and expensive habit, not only to the smoker, but to the people
    surrounding him as well. Despite the efforts of the government and the various health
    organizations of the different countries to control this, there is still a significant
    percentage of smokers all over the world.The researcher proposes to use the aid of
    technology and create an application that will aid the users in quitting smoking for
    good. This app will keep track of the progress of the user, and has features that will
    serve as further incentives to make the user want to quit smoking. Some of the features
    include a calculator for money saved, health risks from smoking and benefits from
    quitting, a social networking feature, and various achievements in a form of badges in
    relation to their progress.

I. Overview of the Social Issue
       The leading cause of preventable cancer is tobacco. Preventable cancers are
   type of cancers that are a result of a person's lifestyle, such as food intake
   and activity levels. Worldwide, 5.4 million deaths yearly is caused by the
   consumption of tobacco, according to the World Health Organization (WHO). They
   have also surmised that a billion may die in this century if the current number
   of people who smoke do not decrease.
       Smoking brings absolutely no benefits, at least none that had been verified
   by doctors. In fact, it only brings harm to the smoker and to the people surrounding
   them as well. Health risks to the smoker include various types of cancer, lung and
   heart diseases, negative effects in the reproductive health in both men and women,
   which in turn would result to premature babies who are born with health
   complications, and eye defects which eventually lead to blindness. Effects caused
   by secondhand smoke are equally devastating. Secondhand smoke causes 600,000 deaths
   yearly according to the World Health Organization.
       Despite the government's fervent efforts to curb the unhealthy habit of smoking
   cigarettes among Filipinos, many still continue this practice. According to the
   Global Adult Tobacco Survey (GATS), 28% of thr Filipino adults aged 15 years
   and older are tobacco smokers. Of these, 48% made an attempt to quit, but only
   mere 5% has succeeded in doing so. On the other hand, the Global Youth Tobacco
   Survey shows that 12% of students aged 13 to 15 years are smokers, which increased
   from 8.9% in 2011.
   
II. Overview of the Information System Solution
        We propose to design a mobile application which will aid the user who wants to
    quit smoking. The various functions that the application will provide will be based
    on the preliminary information that the user will input upon their first use. This
    will make the application tailor to the user's needs as personally as possible.
        The functions of the application will include: (a) calendar which tracks the
    progress of the user in terms of the days he did not smoke; (b) calculator for money
    saved by quitting smoking, based on the information that the user will provide regarding
    the details of their smoking habit; (c) calculator for the amount of time saved from
    quitting smoking, also based on the information that the user will provide; (d) various
    information about smoking such as negative effects to oneself and to others; (e) information
    on the location of various quitting clinics; (f) quick dial function for the Department
    of Health's "quitline"; and (g) a  "buddy" function: the user can view other user's
    profiles where they can see their achievements (number of days quit, money saved, etc)
    and can add them as a "quitting buddy".
        The calendar that serves as a tracker and the calculator that computes the amount of
    savings would help the user motivate to continue his progress. Knowing the quitting clinics
    and having a quick dial function for the DOH's quitline for smokers would give the user the
    external helps that he needs. Having quitting buddies and seeing their progress and achievements
    would also help motivate the user. They can also help encourage each other and give advices.
    
III. Review of Related Literature
        As of 2016, there are 29.7 million Filipino who are smartphone users.  These smartphones
    are most probably called as such due to the  increased functionality and features such as
    being able to run various apps, play games, take pictures, use as a navigator, play music,
    and a lot more. This plethora of features makes the smartphone akin to a "Swiss Army Knife".
    This is also the reason why more and more people become dependent on these handy devices.
    It is no surprise then, that even for support in smoking cessation, a lot of smokers
    who are also smartphone users turn to apps to aid them in their endeavor.
        For smokers who are reluctant to have a consultation, or are not keen on support
    groups and personal interaction, they can turn to the app for a decent aid in quitting.
    Mobile phone-based smoking cessation apps and programs are reported as easy to use
    and understand, feasible and acceptable, convenient, and less intrusive.
        The downloads for the smoking cessation applications for android phones tally between
    310,800  and 1,248,000 per month. The number of downloads of apps for iPhones is not
    available in the Apple Store, so these could not be tallied. These applications can be
    categorized as: (a)calculator; (b) hypnosis; (c) rationing; and (d) calendar/tracker.
    According to the study, these apps did not conform to, or have very little integration
    of, the Clinical Practice Guidelines for Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence, and other
    proven methods and practices.
        Studies have shown that social interventions aid in the continuance of smoking cessation.
    One of these has analyzed an online social support network and its effect in the success
    of quitting. The online network consisted of various people from different stages of quitting
    and various age groups. This stratified arrangement produced favorable result, as there is
    sharing of information and wisdom between successful quitters and beginners. Another study,
    though limited only to two groups which are broadly categorized as "married" and "single"
    respectively, had also shown generally favorable results in the first group. Another helpful
    factor in quitting is to have someone as a comparison for one's progress, be it as a role
    model or a competitor. These findings are the basis for the in-app social network. The user
    can get motivated by seeing the achievements on another person's profile.
        To help reinforce the need to quit smoking, information regarding the health risks must
    be properly conveyed to the smoker. A study shows that there are smokers who have misconceptions
    on the dire effects of smoking, most commonly adolescents who have at least one family member
    who is a smoker. These misinformed adolescents have the highest risk of the detrimental
    effects of smoking as they do not understand the consequences it brings. This is the basis
    for adding smoking information in the app.
    
IV. References
        Abroms LC, Padmanabhan N, Thaweethai L, Phillips T. (2011); iPhone Apps for Smoking
    Cessation: A Content Analysis; Elsevier Inc.
        Abroms LC, Westmass JL, Bontemps-Jones J, et al. (2013); A Content Analysis of Popular
    Smartphone Apps for Smoking Cessation; Elsevier Inc.
        Ahmed S, Sharmin M. (2015); Why do mobile phone-based smoking cessation interventions
    struggle and how can we make them more efective?; iConference 2015 Proceedings
        Cahill K, Perera R (2008); Competitions and Incentives for Smoking Cessation; Cochrane
    Database of Systematic Reviews
        Fiore MC, Jaen CR, Baker TB, et al. (2008); Treating Tobacco Use and Dependence: 2008 Update;
    Rockville, MD: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services
        Harun, et al. (2015); Smartphone Dependency and Its Impact on Purchase 	Behavior;
    Canadian Center of Science and Education
        Leventhal H, Glynn K, Fleming R (1987); Is the Smoking Decision an 'Informed Choice'?
    Effect of Smoking Risk Factors on Smoking Beliefs; Journal of the American Medical Associaltion
        Mermelstein R, Cohen S, Lichtenstein E, et al. (1986); Social Support and Smoking Cessation
    and Maintenance; Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology
        Mishra A, Chaturvedi P, Datta S, et al. (2015); Harmful Effects of Nicotine; Indian Journal
    of Medical and Paediatric Oncology
        Satyanarayanan, M. (2005); Swiss army knife or wallet?; IEEE

